Last night I could hear them again. They make so little noise that I do not understand how it can carry through the corridors of this house. But carry it does. It is hard enough to sleep, gravid and swollen as I am; and once I hear it I cannot turn my thoughts away from it. So when that silken whisper began to tug at me I dragged myself to my feet to answer the summons. I drew on a wrapper, because the half-hearted English summer night did not warm me past the top of my skin, and padded on naked feet down the stairs and through the dim passages until I came into the orangery. The moon was full, dazzling among the foliage of the olive and lemon trees, glinting through the stinking juniper. If it had not been for the walls and windows I might have thought myself transported – and I caught myself thinking: home. But that Mediterranean island was not home; it was never home, no matter how much I longed to belong there, no matter how I yearned to lose myself forever in the midday shade of the evergreen forests. I should have remembered that I am an Englishwoman, a Christian, alien and pale- skinned and above all James’s wife. If I had held tight to those undeniable facts – if I had kept faith – then … Oh, but it is done, it is over, it is no good now.

I stood shivering and barefoot on the threshold, staring at the shimmer of reflections at the far end of the room, where the glass cases stand half concealed by the greenery.

The moonlight and shadows were so deceptive that I could make out nothing but my own wan face peering back at me through leaves, my thin shoulders and bony neck above the shocking mass of my breasts and belly. It was not until I stepped forward into a band of darkness, erasing myself, that I could make out the contents of the nearest vivarium: the branches dry on the dead stones, the scatter of fallen pine needles, the scabrous bundles that hung like limbed fruit from the webs that spanned from one side to the other. I could smell putrefaction. The sound that had woken me grew louder – or did it? Perhaps it was an illusion, perhaps it is always, ever, an illusion – and seemed to swirl about the room, coming from new directions or from every direction at once. It is neither a song nor a susurrus, not a call nor a creak nor a command; and yet it is all of those. It cut my breath and made my innards roil. I found my legs carrying me towards the tank, until I was barely a hand’s width from the glass.

Within the tank, something moved. At first it was hardly perceptible, a little trembling in the cobweb, a glint of moonlight too brief to fix my gaze upon. Then, with its peculiar darting rush, the spider was poised in front of me. Its abdomen glistened like a polished mineral; its precise legs were dotted with vivid red at the joints. I was glad of the pane between us. But as I kept my gaze steadily upon it, I grew conscious of more movement, from every side: until at last I glanced up and across, and saw that in each tank a spider was emerging from its corner or crevice, advancing into the dense heart of its web. It must have been my footsteps across the floor, or some other variation in vibration, temperature or humidity – indeed, let us be rational, James would cry! But to my sleepless mind, it had the deliberate improbability of a nightmare. I could feel the hostility, the reproach in every eye – and there were so many of them. So many eyes, and each one turned on me … I said, although not aloud, Forgive me.

I said, I did not mean to bring you here.

I said, Are you hungry? I shall bring you more food. I shall bring it to you alive. And I meant it, even though it made my gorge rise to remember the long sea voyage, and the looks that the sailors turned on me when I begged them for live rats at any price. I had not known I could be so fierce, so devoid of womanly tenderness; I had not imagined that I could sacrifice my finer feelings so entirely. A rat’s panic is surprisingly like a man’s, I discovered, and yet if it was necessary to lean over the opened lid of a glass tank and drop a wriggling, squealing, scratching and biting victim to certain death, I found that I could do it without blenching. I saw in James’s expression what I had become. He would have said that he approved, that he had commanded me to keep the spiders alive, that it was the least I could do to atone – but his frown belied him. He never said so, but I think he looked at the rats, caught in their cauls of silk and sucked dry, and wondered whether, under different circumstances, I would baulk at greater crimes.

I said, What can I do?

The roaring in my ears rose. It was like the sound of the surf against the shore, the night we left. I know perfectly well (yes, let us be rational!) that the noise is made not by the spiders themselves, but by their silk – and indeed that it is not exactly the silk either, that the sound is a mere reflection, no more innate in the silk than the colours of iridescence can be distilled out of a beetle’s shell. But that did not protect me from the shuddering impression that the spiders remembered that night, too, the night we left Kratos – that they could follow my thoughts, that they were deliberately imitating the hoarse crash of the waves on the sand, in furious reproach.

I was too sick, afterwards, to set it down here: but perhaps I will, now. All that I can remember, at least … I remember a wallowing bed beneath me that became the hard slats of a dinghy; I remember vast nausea that overcame me as I raised my head, so that I vomited helplessly into something that I only began to realise was the sea. And I remember dim shapes of stone overhanging the water as we went further along the shore, and James sitting rigid opposite me, a whitish blur resolving slowly into his double-flickering face, wearing a smile that I did not yet understand. Behind him, a dark figure moved like an automaton, and I heard the dip and splash of oars. I do not recollect whether I was obliged to gasp out an enquiry, or whether James was pleased to volunteer, as I retched, the information that we were, at last, on our way back to England; that I should become a good wife again, or reap the consequences; and that it was not only his intention but his absolute conviction that he should become a wealthy and respected man. I do not think that any of those pronouncements made much impression on me, at the time. I was too bewildered, too absorbed in trying to fix my eyes upon the lurching cliffs. I had not said farewell to Hira. I felt as though some deep root of me had been wrenched from the anchoring rock and was withering already in the salt air. I wish I had launched myself out of the boat, desperate and ill as I was: I would have made landfall, or drowned. But I had not the presence of mind. I was carried, like a good wife, on the tide of another’s desire, even though it bore me away from everything I held dear. Well, not everything, I suppose; but I did not know then what else the tossing boat carried. I could not even keep a steady gaze on the line of the shore; a moment later the nausea took hold of me again, and everything about me blurred and spun.

Perhaps James took pity on me, for when the spasms receded and I was able to catch my breath, he took my hand. ‘Let us pray,’ he said. ‘Almighty God, look upon your servant Sophia and lead her to repentance. Chastise her as a father would, until the black taint of sin is washed away by her tears. And carry us both in your hands, back to your blessed land of England.’ He looked at me for a moment; when I began to retch again, he said, clearing his throat sharply, ‘Amen.’ ‘I must go back,’ I said, when I could speak. ‘I must see Hira.’ He shook his head.
